# Introduction

Starting a fire is easy, right? Why write an entire book about it? Well, if you ever camped in a rainy and windy weather, you might know that a simple task of taking a match to a bundle of kindling does not suffice. The task borders on the impossible. And what if you don't have any matches or lighters on you? Knowing a couple of tricks could save your ass or turn a cold dark night in the woods into a memorable and fun adventure. Finally, fire is a fascinating thing in its own, I had fun learning about it while doing my research for this book and I hope you'll enjoy it too.

I had been pretty lucky to spend my childhood in a small town with lots of nature around me, so I had lots of practice. Including starting fires with some very untraditional methods - like breaking the engine's valve and spitting on sodium extracted from it. As kids, we weren't taking it too seriously, we were just having fun. And that, I think, was helping us to learn new and creative ways of starting a fire. Playing with fire (responsibly!) is the first reason I wanted to write this book.

As a child I was also fascinated by adventure novels. You know, those novels where the protagonist gets stranded on a deserted island and has to do away with the minimum of equipment, if any.

The first time I saw someone actually start a fire with friction was relatively late. I was in my early thirties and visiting Hawaii. The Hawaiian Cultural Center employee (or do they call the artists?) spent less than five minutes from start to a blazing flames. It was fascinating! I attempted to use the bow drill method once at a picnic with not much luck. But then I attended a survival camp where my instructor showed me a few tricks. And on my first proper try I actually was able to start a fire. To go from picking a stick, shaping a drill and a base board out of it, making a bow, spinning the drill to produce coal and then blowing it into flames - it was life-changing! Next time I had a chance to practice the craft, it didn't take much effort at all! I was hooked! And I wanted to share!

I am a big geek, so all sorts of hi-tech gear always fascinated me. My approach to survival for a while was having the right equipment with me. That is until a few years ago, one of the guys from the TechTV got stranded in the snowy forest for over a week and ultimately ended dead. He was the epitome of prepared for me. I was shocked to realize how much we modern society depend on technology that surrounds us. And we're rapidly loosing very basic skills. Such as the ability to start a fire. I've seen some people not being able to start a fire even in their own fireplace, using the driest wood, fire starters and everything else they could only wish for. That's frightening to me!

Now, fire is not the ultimate solution that is going to keep you alive. Kim TK had managed to burn his car's tires to keep his family warm, but he died while going for help. But the fire is one of the key elements of the survival triad - TK, TK and TK. And that's the second reason why I wanted to write this book.
